- Well, once again, welcome to this month's
third Friday of the month radio show,
Ask Your Herb Doctor.
My name's Andrew Murray.
- My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray.
- For those of you who perhaps have never listened
to the shows, they run every third Friday of the month
from seven to late p.m.
We're both licensed medical herbalists
who trained in England, graduated there
with a degree in herbal medicine.
We run a clinic in Garboville where we consult
with clients about a wide range of conditions
and recommend dietary supplements, nutritional counseling,
and a alternative approach to the management
of various different conditions.
You're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor
on KMUD Garboville, 91.1 FM,
and from 7.30 until the end of the show at eight o'clock,
you're invited to call in either with questions related to
or unrelated to tonight's topic
of the metabolism of cancer.
We're very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peat
with us once more, and this month's topic
is actually based on his newsletter.
The newsletter he brought out back in May,
was another introduction to cancer metabolism,
but if I remember rightly,
the paranoia versus trust-anoia was a interesting concept
where most people trust mainstream medicine
to do them right.
Choose wisely and find your information out
from alternative sources.
I think that alternative word is another very good
starting point for tonight's show.
It is the drive that the radio show is having
to basically keep running.
Free speech radio and independent radio stations
are really not very common in America anymore.
Radio shows are generally getting taken over,
becoming more and more mainstream,
but obviously free speech is still alive,
and again, that's our constitutional First Amendment right.
So it's a very precious thing to have free speech
aired on the airwaves, whether it's locally here
or brought across the nation on the internet
or other radio stations that would carry this show.
It's a very precious commodity.
So you know that when free speech
starts to become suppressed,
you know the government are really not
what you want in power.
I will say no more about that,
but the constitutional amendment, First Amendment,
is a very strong and fundamental right
that we all have as American citizens
to be able to freely choose what it is
rather than be told that this is what you're gonna get.
So the Ask Your Ab Doctor show
is definitely one of those radio programs
that brings you an alternative to the mainstream narrative,
what you're gonna hear from mainstream science and doctors,
and Dr. Raymond P., fortunately,
is a wealth of information, very alternative,
definitely outside the box thinking
like so many of the great scientists
that he quotes during his work from St. Georgie
to Gilbert Ling to May Wan Ho,
many, many others that we've mentioned over several years now
probably going on eight years
that we've been delighted to have Dr. Peat
sharing his wisdom with us.
- And if you listen to commercial radio now and then,
you know what media consolidation means.
It's cookie cutter programming.
And 15 to 20 minutes of every hour,
they're hounding you to buy stuff.
KMET is different, completely different.
And you know why?
Because it's independent, community-based community radio
funded by the community.
And our only responsibility is to you, the listener.
So please support KMET.
- Okay, Dr. Peat, is Dr. Peat with us?
- Yes. - Oh, hi, Dr. Peat.
Well, thanks so much for joining us.
I think what I wanted to do
was just basically describe an outline
of what has happened in science
and which has very much derailed
some very good research that was done
that perhaps didn't go along
with the corporate collectivistic background controllers,
if you like, from the Carnegie and Rockefeller Foundations.
I know a couple of months back, we had the subject
and very much what was brought out was that
the institution has institutionalized medicine
to the point where good science
becomes largely ignored or demonized.
I think that's very true to say,
and it's not just scare tactics.
It's very much true that alternative medical doctors
get hounded out of medicine.
They have to leave the country, go abroad,
where they can continue to practice
because in this country,
there is quite a powerful suppression of alternative ideas.
So I think without me probably carrying on too much more,
I think just starting with Otto Warburg,
if you would outline perhaps the history
of oxidative metabolism, which William Koch,
Frederick Koch, through Otto Warburg
and Albert St. Georgi elucidated
and how that really should have been
the direction that medicine,
if it really wanted to help people with cancer,
should have gone in,
but which through various powerful lobbying groups
and the estrogen industry, et cetera, have derailed it.
And it's become very much a dogmatic,
destructive, sidel type approach
like bactericides or viricides.
It's a kind of cancer recidal approach
to killing cancer cells with chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
and all the other targeted programs
that basically destroy the organism rather than help it.
So would you be able to give an outline of metabolism
as seen through the eyes of these great scientists
who really were onto something?
- Yeah, starting in 1900,
the idea of electrons in molecules
was really just being explored.
It was about 1930, '35,
when mainstream chemists started accepting
that there was such a thing as a free radical.
But in 1900, Moses Gomberg at the University of Michigan
had produced a stable free radical,
which with a free,
but fairly unreactive electron,
produced a deep purple color
with a very small amount of the molecule in solution.
And this started other chemists thinking about
what produces color in molecules.
And over the next four or five years,
several chemists were theorizing about mobile electrons
in molecules like benzoquinone.
And these were really at the center of mainstream chemistry,
but even the average university chemist
wasn't up to date on the theories of electrons.
It was only in 1916 that Gilbert Lewis
gave his theory of electron bonding.
And then Niels Bohr, I think it was 1921,
described his picture of how electrons
orbit around molecules.
And then several years later,
Leibniz-Pauling gave a more detailed description
of how electrons work in chemical bonds.
So the very best biochemists
were just getting started around 1935
thinking about electrons.
And biologists and medical doctors
couldn't imagine how electrons could have anything to do
with the life process.
So the process that is involved in oxidation,
it's the movement of electrons from a fuel
such as sugar or fat to oxygen.
And in the process,
there's a lot of extractable energy in some form.
And when the biologists finally admitted
that electrons had to be explained somehow,
they wanted to compartmentalize
how the energy is used in moving
from glucose or fat down to oxygen.
And so they invented little machines
that would take sort of a quantum of energy
out of that moving electron
and attach it to various little machines,
which they called pumps or motors and so on,
and explained muscle contraction and secretion
and all processes in this very primitive concept
of biological energy,
where the actual process is a flow, a streaming process.
There's no standing still for the electron.
The cell dies if it isn't constantly moving
the electrons from fuel to oxygen.
- So this is a process that's going on every breath we take
and every single cell in our body
is moving these electrons from sugar or fat to oxygen.
- Yeah, and when you try to measure
the electrical energy of a cell,
you stick a needle in, for example,
to measure the voltage.
And people have sort of a standing static picture
of the cell in which it's a membrane
and inside there are statistically
randomized molecules carrying electrons.
And so they think of it as effectively a bag of electrons,
which they're measuring.
What they're doing is disrupting
this intricate constant flow from fuel to oxygen.
And they're measuring an injured cell.
Every time they try to stop it to fit their model,
they're destroying some cell process.
And in the 1940s,
Ben Chorchee published some of his work
with oxidative processes in muscle
and how energy is used.
And he was the one who discovered
that ATP literally makes muscle contract.
He extracted muscle and used various simplified preparations
to show that simply adding ATP made the muscle move.
And he was thinking of something electronic going on
related to oxidation and fuel use and so on.
But he found that the contracted muscle
in the presence of ATP didn't break down the ATP molecule.
That ATP causes muscle to contract
without changing its bond structure.
- And this is very interesting, folks.
When you hear this,
I don't want to interrupt you too much.
So muscle contraction can occur
in the absence of the breakdown of ATP,
which is not what I was taught when I was at school.
So anyway, yeah,
most people that listen to what you've just said now
might remember that the classic description is ATP
is reduced to ADP and AMP.
And that release of that phosphate group
is what actually drives the muscle.
But Dr. Peat, you're saying that that is not the way it is.
- Yeah, when I was in graduate school,
the muscle biologists all over the world
were saying that ATP has a high energy bond
of 11 or 14 kilocalories per mole.
And it's that energy that can be used
to explain the little muscles,
motors in the muscles that cause movement.
Without that high energy,
it would be impossible to explain their motors.
But meanwhile, Gilbert Ling had,
I think he probably read "Sanctuary II"
and was aware that ATP didn't have to break down
to release energy.
He pointed out that the energy of the whole molecule
of ATP sticking to the protein of the muscle
has an energy of stickiness or adsorption energy
of 21 kilocalories per mole,
twice as much as the hypothetical bond energy.
And that explains why it makes the protein change
without having to break down.
Simply the relationship between the molecules
shifts the whole structure.
And this is very much that kind of holistic,
alternative approach to science and to biology
that enables these people that are doing this
to see the whole thing is confluent.
And it's constant, like you said, electrons don't stop.
They're constantly moving.
They're constantly in action.
And that is life right there
when molecules are being produced
and cells are being signaled and communication is happening.
It all involves energy.
And I know you're a big advocate
of supporting thyroid function
because that ultimately is a very big driver of metabolism
as is mitochondrial function.
- And the energy of the cell.
- Yeah, and that all of this is,
we're all very much energetic living beings.
We're not static.
And actually a lot of what we'll perhaps get into later on
here with cancer metabolism being a very aberrant form
of that kind of metabolism,
which is much more destructive and very negative
is very much opposed to regular life,
which is productive and energetic.
And that high energy state
is what actually keeps us alive and healthy
and allows our immune systems
to get on top of spontaneous cancers
'cause they know that they do arise all the time.
And it's only in those lowered energetic states
where people can actually produce a cancer
that starts to take them out.
And it's all the negative lactic acid production, et cetera,
from tumors that contributes in the carbon monoxide.
We'll get into that later on.
- But we're not talking about like the high adrenaline,
that type of energy.
We're talking about energy from a cell functioning properly
and having enough thyroid,
which basically means the cell has enough oxygen.
And it's a very calm state,
but your cells have a lot of energy in that calm state.
- All right, you're listening to After Care
with Dr. K.M.E.D. Galbraith, 91.1 FM.
And from 7.30 until the end of the show,
callers are welcome to call in with questions
either related to this month's topic
of the metabolism of cancer.
And a toll-free number if you live outside the area,
there's an 800 number, which is 800-K-M-U-D-RAD.
So that's 800-568-3723.
Or if you're in the area code, the number's 923-3911.
- Actually, Michael said that he didn't think that-
- I thought that the long,
well, if you've been calling the show from Missouri,
call whatever number you've been using.
But I was under the impression the 800 number
didn't work out of California,
but I could be totally wrong.
- Oh, okay, interesting. I didn't know that.
Thanks for telling me. - Anyway, I mean,
we're broke and the 800 number isn't free.
The 800 number costs us.
So you might as well have it on your phone bill anyway.
- All right, there you go.
Okay, so yeah, all right.
Somebody was gonna come in at one point.
- Oh, no, we're gonna do that at 7.25.
- Oh, we're doing it at 7.25, okay.
All right.
So Dr. Peat, getting back to this kind of energetic
state of the cell,
that's probably a good point at which you understand
how cancer can arise,
how it can be allowed to be outside the body's
normal control,
and how that energetic state,
we won't call it energetic,
perhaps we call it excited, depleted state,
should best be understood as a way to understand cancer.
In the 1920s, at the time,
Farberg was developing his idea of oxidation.
And in England, David Kylan was working on another side
of oxidation with these cytochromes.
And he found that when an insect flight muscle,
or a bird flight muscle,
a very energetic muscle,
when it was contracting and highly stimulated,
the pigment that he was studying disappeared,
showing that there was no oxygen present.
The extreme activity had consumed
all of the oxygen momentarily,
and shifted the cell and those pigments
into a reduced state of excess electrons.
So this was, St. George and Kylan
were simultaneously working on the ideas
that William Frederick Koch at the University of Michigan
had developed independently,
that it's the flow of electrons through the system
to oxygen, which has to be continuous.
And when something over-stimulates
or irritates an area,
the idea of irritation or carcinogenic smoke and so on
was already known.
And the irritating effect of estrogen, for example,
So the idea of excitation,
exhausting the tissue oxygen,
is at the center of the idea of what cancer is.
Warburg described his thought at that time
as the cancer has a defect in respiration,
which makes it lack the Pasteur effect,
which was what Pasteur had seen in yeast,
was that oxygen normally causes the yeast
to stop from ending,
to stop producing lactic acid or ethanol
in the case of beer.
But St. George, he said,
there's something wrong with the system
that prevents cancer from,
even in the presence of oxygen,
from being able to turn off that excitatory process
that produces lactic acid.
So there's something keeping the cell
in the excited state.
And that's where the details have been developed now
over the last 90 years since Warburg expressed that idea.
What are the things that can turn off the excitation,
the excess of stimulation,
and let the oxygen, which can be present,
let the oxygen do its work
to turn off the lactic acid production?
- So it's a form of energy production
the body has as like a backup mechanism.
When it's not using oxygen properly,
then it converts to using--
- Sugar.
- Sugar, and it's inefficient, and it's wasteful,
and it overexcites the cell.
I'm just trying to understand this myself
and also put it into some
a little bit more understandable terms for our listeners.
- When it's either deficient in oxygen or overstimulated.
- So that it used up all the oxygen
'cause it was overstimulated.
- Yeah, so it's the same thing
as suffocating or being overstimulated.
There's no oxygen to turn off the production of lactic acid.
And then the lactic acid itself
is an irritant, a stimulant.
It shifts the cell away from the use of oxygen
towards the production of more lactic acid.
- So it's like a vicious cycle.
Here, we're going to pause you for a moment here, Dr. Bate,
while we have Jordan come in.
And we're going to talk about
what a wonderful radio station this is.
It's an oasis of diversity.
And it's an oasis amid the sameness
of the commercial media landscapes.
We provide essential nourishment for your mind and soul
with our amazing variety of programs.
- Wow, what a show tonight, very scientific.
No one like Dr. Peat.
- No one.
- He really gives you the info,
but some real science tonight.
You really got to pay attention.
But I just want to thank you guys
for coming in and doing your show every month.
I want to thank all the talk show hosts.
And I want you, dear listener,
to thank the talk show hosts by calling in your support
to 707-923-3911.
We've got some phone answers out there
who'd really like you to keep them busy.
And I loved, Andrew, your opening remarks
about the Bill of Rights, the First Amendment,
and how if we don't use our rights, we lose our rights.
- Absolutely, absolutely.
The government need to hear that from us.
- Yeah, and your comment earlier out in the hall
about that's what it's all about.
This is free speech radio.
There's 25 different viewpoints
from seven to eight during the course of the month.
And it's part of our programming that includes you.
And we just really want you folks who listen,
and we know talk show listeners are pretty emphatic listeners
and pretty dedicated listeners.
- And I know there's people who listen
from all across the country for this because they call in.
- Right, yeah, absolutely.
From the East Coast through the Midwest.
- And if you don't call in even, that's okay.
You can still donate.
You can just call in at 903-707-923-3911
because this community radio station
is not getting support from all, yeah,
or for when you buy products,
some of your money is going to, yeah.
And marketing budgets of major multinationals
do not support KMUD, so it's up to you.
- Any amount, gratefully appreciated.
Just write out a check, money order, whatever you have.
Send it to KMUD here in Garboville.
- Yeah, it's box 135 in Redway.
- Box 135, Redway, California.
- And don't forget if you-- - 95, California, 95560.
- If you're listening online, kmud.org,
there is a way to donate right there
while you're listening.
Press the red button.
Sustaining membership of $120 a year
will, can be taken out $10 a month very painlessly,
and it's a great way to support the MUD.
- It's a great way to support your First Amendment too.
- Yeah, well, 'cause the free speech you're hearing today
was paid for by people who donated
during our last pledge drive.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So I wanna let you guys get back to Dr. Peat,
and thanks for the show.
- Thank you, Jordan. - You're welcome.
Yeah, well, we appreciate KMUD for allowing the show,
Ask Your Ob Doctor, to even happen.
I think it was probably 12 years ago now.
I let time fly so quickly, but I think it was 2004.
Yeah, I think it was 2004 we did the first show.
Here we are, 2016.
Anyway, Dr. Peat, you're there, right?
- So you were telling us about lactic acid
and how it feeds cancer cells
and because of the lack of oxygen?
- Yeah, anything that causes a lack of oxygen
or excessive irritation and stimulating
to the point of fatigue
will produce an excess of lactic acid.
- Just like when you run too long
and you get stitches in your side?
- Yeah, and lactic acid produces an imbalance
in the electrons.
It takes up some electrons to be formed,
but in the process,
that increases the alkalinity inside the cell
and in several ways creates a vicious circle
of more electrons actually than it can take up.
And one way that the cancer cell tries to return to normal
is to use some of those excess electrons
that can't be consumed by converting pyruvic acid
to lactic acid,
is to use them in synthesizing fat.
So interestingly, the cancer cell turns on the enzymes
that synthesize fat as a way to drain away more electrons
and then as oxygen becomes available,
the respiratory process will burn fat.
And so the cancer cell is eating all the sugar it can get
and tearing down the tissue of the body
to use amino acids in place of glucose
when that's deficient
and converting the energy from glycolysis,
either amino acids or glucose,
converting that to fat
and then oxidizing the fat with whatever oxygen it has.
And oxidizing fat is less efficient
- The last rule.
- in terms of oxygen use.
So it adds to the problem of oxygen deficiency.
- Is this where the myth comes in
where you hear a lot of people say,
oh, sugar feeds cancer?
- Well, yeah, actually.
- Does cancer eat sugar?
- Sugar deprivation turns on the Warburg effect,
turns on the stress reaction.
- And makes the lactic acid and makes the cancer.
- Cancer cells.
- Yeah.
- So it's actually the opposite, folks.
- If you go into the ketosis,
the stress metabolism that turns on this partial oxidation
of fatty acids produces what they call the ketone bodies,
but one of the ketone bodies is not a ketone.
And it's the reduced state of this pairing
of acetoacetate and beta-ketobutyrate,
which is not a ketone.
This is shifted so that it increases reductive imbalance.
So it's almost as bad as lactate.
So it's the stress that is creating the cycle
of excess electron imbalance.
And then that in turn activates things that can amplify,
depending on the total situation,
can amplify the stress reaction
and the reductive excess of electrons.
So that, for example, the formation of prostaglandins
is turned on when there's a shift
towards too many electrons,
an imbalance in the direction of NADH rather than NAD,
or of too much reduced sulfhydryl.
People are talking, actually,
they're giving glutathione supplements
to increase the electron abundance in the tissue
where the cancer cell already has an excess of electrons.
It's a powerful antioxidant system
that keeps the cancer cell alive,
but in this defective state.
And the same process that turns on prostaglandins,
which create all kinds of inflammation
and tendency to reproduce themselves
without differentiating.
It also turns on aromatase,
which makes estrogen,
which activates more of the tendency
to produce excess electrons.
- I picked up on what you said about five minutes ago,
and I jotted a note down here just so I could ask you this,
and this is definitely not scripted.
But you mentioned the inability to relax,
the over-excitation or the excitotoxic effect
of various mediators that promote cancer,
and how the cancer itself is in a very excited state.
And this constant excitation,
and that oxygen, the presence of oxygen,
calms that excitation down.
And this is the part that's unscripted.
I wanted to ask you to understand this myself,
because I know you're an advocate of CO2
and increasing your CO2.
As a definite health benefit,
and I know we've talked about oxygen being a poison,
essentially, and I think that's not a bad word for it.
But so how is oxygen in this way being a help,
as opposed to our general understanding
of oxygen being a fairly toxic gas?
- The CO2 does at least three central things
related to the cancer.
One, it's acting like a calming agent,
the way ATP does to relax muscles
that aren't stimulated,
holding them in a state of readiness to contract.
And the CO2 is an analog of these pigment molecules
that Kirk and Moses Gomberg were visualizing.
- So you said CO2 has a structural similarity,
'cause we haven't even talked about
the anthocyanins and the flavonoids yet,
but is that what you're saying?
- Yeah, it's an acid, a Lewis acid,
which doesn't involve any protons,
but the double-bonded oxygens on the carbon
are the essential feature
of the free radical oxidative catalysts
that Koch was talking about,
and that George worked with for about 40 or 50 years.
And this acidic effect modifies the proteins
so that they are stabilized, calmed down,
kept quiet so that they aren't forced
to shift over to the lactic acid metabolism.
And the CO2 also can fill in and correct
what's missing in the Krebs cycle
or the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
It's replenishing the catalytic effect of the fuel
that keeps the oxygen process going.
And then CO2 also directly intervenes
in the inhibition of lactic acid production.
And so just by increasing the CO2,
breathing in a bag, for example,
for a minute or so at a time, several times a day,
will lower your serum lactic acid.
And it's only in the last two or three years
that several people are recognizing
that you can diagnose cancer
just by an increased chronic lactic acid excess in the blood.
And since it's one of the factors
that keeps the process going,
anything you can do that will shift
towards oxidative metabolism
and lower your production of lactic acid is helpful.
- That's why you recommend for people who have cancer
that they go to high elevation
so that they can increase the amount of CO2
in their bloodstream.
- Yeah, there were studies in Russia in the 1960s
in which they gave carcinogens to rats.
And then they treated some with chemotherapy
and took them to, I think it was 17,000 feet altitude.
And the ones at high altitude recovered
at a very high rate with or without the chemotherapy.
The chemotherapy cured a few of them at normal altitude,
but cured most of them at the high altitude.
And about 100 years ago,
the insurance company industry was already aware
that the cancer mortality was about 10% lower
in cities at high altitudes.
So it was well recognized.
- Well recognized, 'cause if anyone doesn't wanna
lose money, it's the insurance company.
Well, thanks so much for explaining that.
Let me just remind people again,
it's a live show and callers are welcome to call in.
I know Dr. Peat enjoys answering questions.
The more outside the box, the better for him.
I mean, I really appreciate your explanation
of the CO2 effects and those three different mechanisms.
And I know, I promise you now folks,
nothing was scripted here.
That was just straight off the cuff.
So really appreciate your input, Dr. Peat.
A number, if you live in the area,
923-3911, outside the area, 800-KMUD-RAD.
If those people listening on the internet,
I know that you can always communicate
with KMUD via the internet as well.
So Dr. Peat, just talking about those energetic effects,
and I wanted to ask you about the pigments
and we've already covered some of those.
You mentioned a deep purple pigment
that Moses Gomberg first discovered,
or it got him thinking about the energetic state of pigments
and how I want to bring into this question,
the topic of flavonoids and in herbs and herbal medicine,
I know that things like bilberry, very antioxidant,
there's blackberries, the dark berry pigments,
and we'll get into a couple of other specific herbs
like Pau de Arco and the anthraquinone molecule
in things like cascara and Chinese rhubarb
and a few other plants that contain anthraquinones
and how they have, and I was only reading this afternoon
on PubMed some articles based on those anthraquinones
being proven to be anti-cancer or having
an anti-cancer effect.
So how do you understand?
'Cause one thing for me, just to quote PubMed articles
and understand in my own limited way
from my own limited education background
of how pigments work in terms of how science,
I've been taught, understands it,
but how do you think you see those pigments
affecting that electronic change?
- There have been several lines of research on Imodin,
which is the pigment in aloe and cascara and Chinese rhubarb.
And it has a tremendous unexpected range of functions,
including a somewhat sedative or quieting effect,
definitely not a stimulant,
but activating oxidative metabolism in cells
and having a bacteria suppressing effect
and reducing inflammation.
These are all properties that W.F. Koch saw
in the simple quinone type of oxidative catalyst.
When Koch went to Brazil, he began studying Lopacho.
He was probably the one that made it famous,
which is a similar structure,
multiple ring structure that has a deep color.
What these are doing is the same as carbon dioxide.
They're modifying, sort of tuning up
the electrical system of proteins in cells.
And that's the basic idea that I think has been
a common theme from Farberg through St. Georgi,
is that it's pointless to try to kill the cancer
as if it was a parasite that could simply be removed.
Because it turns out that when cells are normally
being fatigued and replaced,
the dying cell stimulates the growth of stem cells
to replace the tissue.
And that's a process that happens in cancer.
The natural cancer cell is very weak and defective,
so it doesn't have a long lifespan.
But every time it dies, it stimulates the replacement
of a similar defective cell.
And no matter how you kill the cancer cell,
that area is injured and is tending to be replaced.
The injury caused by killing it
stimulates faster replacement in most situations
than just leaving it alone.
And the alternative idea is to tune up
both the tumor metabolism as far as possible
and the metabolism of the surrounding organism.
- Let me pause you there a moment, Dr. Peat.
I think we've got one or two callers on the line.
So let's start taking this first caller.
Caller, where are you from and what's your question?
- Hi, I'm calling from San Jose.
- San Jose, hi, what's your question?
- My question is about the altitude that Dr. Peat mentioned.
Is there any other factor like the weather
or something that influences it in addition to altitude?
For example, let's say Denver versus Albuquerque,
they have different weathers, but fairly similar altitude.
Will both be beneficial
or is there something else also to look at?
- Dr. Peat.
- What's what beneficial?
- The altitude.
So he was saying, was there any other mileage
in external factors like weather
over the actual altitude that has a beneficial effect?
- Yeah, I think excess humidity is harmful
because our osmotic balance
is part of the process of tuning up.
There's an interaction between oxidation reduction
and pH and osmolarity
and all of the regulatory processes interact.
And if you have very high humidity,
it's a slight stress to the system.
So middle range humidity is good
and as much daylight as possible.
15 hours of daylight seems to be optimal
for recovery from cancer.
- So being in the Andes would be a good idea.
Not humid, closer to the equator and high elevation.
- So my question to you, Dr. Peat,
then perhaps about humidity is somewhere like Hawaii,
not a good idea.
I mean, I know it's a sea level for a start, but maybe.
- A volcano in Hawaii would be good.
- Right.
- There you go.
- Monokea.
- Top of Monokea.
All right, so humidity he said has a negative effect,
but outside that and daylight,
the similar altitude will produce a similar benefit.
- Yeah, I think so.
- Okay, so I think we have another caller on the air.
Hi, caller, you're on the air.
Where are you from and what's your question?
- Oh, this is Jordan, I'm from Redway.
And I wanted to ask Dr. Peat a two-part question.
Dr. Peat, earlier you said that when cancer cells go from,
they survive on glucose
and then when they've used all the glucose,
they go on to amino acids.
I was wondering, are those the foods of choice
for the cancer cells or is it because they're so acidic
or is it because they're readily available?
And then the second part of the question is,
I've heard you say before that amino acids
create a medium in the body that allows cancer to grow
and it's confused me because the amino acids are essential.
So I just would like a little explanation on that.
- It depends on what kind of amino acids.
The cysteine, tryptophan and methionine
are the ones that most easily promote
cancer growth and development.
But glutamine and several of the easily metabolized
amino acids are the ones that fuel
the production of lactate even when glucose
is not available or is currently being depleted.
So the stress that lactic acid reinforces
turns on cortisol production and other stress signals
that break down, shift the balance
away from protein synthesis to protein breakdown
of providing amino acids.
Also, fatty acids come into the bloodstream
under the same stress conditions.
And if those are polyunsaturated,
that adds to the prostaglandin inflammation promotion.
And the stress hormones, cortisol and the prostaglandins
accelerate both the inflammation
and the conversion of the tissues to food.
There have been several types of experiments
in which cancer growth can be slowed down
by giving intravenous glucose.
The Russian researcher who was,
he began working on the Pasteur effect,
probably was aware of St. George's thinking in the 1940s.
Some of his research involved giving good doses of glucose
either intravenously or orally.
And with the use of intravenous glucose
and higher provision of oxygen,
the Ehrlich-Ascites carcinoma,
he found could be reverted to normal metabolism.
The classical example of a cell
that is in the Warburg effect of making too much lactic acid,
giving it as much sugar and oxygen as possible
caused it to revert to normal metabolism.
- Wow, well thank you doctor, that's brilliant.
Thank you so much.
- Well thank you for that.
- And thank all the doctors, thank you.
- Okay, so I think we have another caller on the air.
So let's take this next caller.
- Actually they just disappeared.
So hopefully they will call back in a second.
- Okay, the number here if you live in the area
is 923-3911 or if you're outside the area
it's an 800 number, 1-800-KMUD-RAD.
- So Dr. Peat, we've talked about carbon dioxide,
high elevation being quite an anti-cancer therapy.
And we've also talked about some antioxidants
from like cherries and blueberries,
bilberries and the pau d'arco, cascara.
What are some other things that you would say
are pretty anti-cancer and help with this respiratory--
- If you think of-- - Process.
- The process of stress between too much excitation
and not enough energy.
And just look at things that are known to reduce excitation.
Anesthetics, some of the common anesthetics
will turn off the excitation enough
to slow down a cancer growth.
- Have they done like injections of lidocaine or?
- Yeah, lidocaine has been proven effective
against several different cancers,
leukemia and several solid tumors.
I think liver, pancreas and breast, prostate.
- Can I hold you there?
We do have another caller
who I think maybe that call is called back.
So let's take this, oh, the lights are flashing.
You're telling me there's no caller.
- No, it's a new caller.
- Oh, okay, it's a new caller, good.
Okay, caller, you're on the air.
What's your question?
Where are you from?
- Hello? - Hi, you're on the air.
- Hi, yeah, now do you advocate,
let's say you have a lump that's just contained.
It hasn't metastasized.
Let's say it's a lump in your breast or somewhere else
that it's easily gotten to.
Would you advocate surgically removing that lump
so that it won't continue to be a time bomb
and keep growing?
- Dr. Peat, I can't imagine you would, but Dr. Peat?
- If it depends on the whole context.
I've had lumps or things that doctors advised me
to have biopsied, and I just changed what I was doing,
and the problem went away.
But if you aren't aware of anything that you can change,
and if it, for example, if it's hard
and stuck to surrounding tissues
so that it seems definitely to be cancerous,
then probably a lumpectomy is okay
if you make sure that you're taking precautions
against activating a cancer by the surgery itself.
- Well, what kind of precautions can you take?
- For example, surgeries done when a woman
is in the low progesterone part of the month
before opulation, that is much, several times more likely
to metastasize than in the presence of high progesterone.
And I think all of the things that are known
to reduce excitation, reduce lactic acid production,
and increase oxidative metabolism,
I think if all of those are done,
then a lumpectomy is relatively safe.
- Okay, we do have another caller,
so let's keep moving here and get this next caller in.
I'll give them a chance to ask their question.
Caller, where are you from?
- Hi, I'm in Albion, California.
My question is around thyroid.
It seems that it needs to be at optimal function.
I recently went through about five years
of really hard stress.
I'm having fatigue.
I have my thyroid levels drawn,
which what they draw is TSH and free T4,
which come back normal, but on the low end.
And I'm wondering if there's another test
I could ask for, because I know if I increase
the thyroid medication dose, it will change my life.
But I'm wondering if we're looking at the right labs.
- Okay, and there is one more caller after this, Dr. Peat.
So be prepared for one.
- I'm gonna hang up, thank you.
- Okay, thank you.
- I was gonna say, ma'am, if you take your temperatures
and pulses at specific times of the day
and specific reference to eating,
that's a much more accurate gauge for yourself
to assess your thyroid function.
And if you contact us, we can send you a form for free.
So a form that you can fill out your temperatures
and your pulses at different times of day.
- Let me just, let me ask you--
- And Dr. Peat, do you wanna mention something?
- Go ahead, we've only got five minutes.
- Yeah, the T3 is the essential active thyroid hormone.
And under stress, T4 is converted to reverse T3,
which interferes.
So you can't at all interpret thyroid function
with just T4 and TSH.
And even T3 by itself, you have to consider
how much stress is causing it to be converted
to the inactive and blocking form.
And so you want a good ratio of active T3 to reverse T3.
And if you measure your cortisol,
you can see usually what is causing it to be inactive.
Sugar glucose is needed to convert T4 to the active T3.
To the active T3 form and to hold down the cortisol,
which would inactivate the T3,
convert T4 to reverse T3.
So sugar is protective.
Keeping, avoiding hypoxic conditions or inflammation
that wastes oxygen locally.
Any area that's deficient in oxygen
or has an excess of lactic acid can locally destroy
active T3.
- I think I have to hold you there, Dr. Peat.
I don't wanna be rude, but we've got a couple of minutes
just to close out some information here
before we sign off at eight o'clock.
So thank you so much for your time.
- And is there any one last thing you wanna say, Dr. Peat?
- Nope.
- Okay, thank you so much, Dr. Peat.
And I wanna make sure I announce before we wrap up here
that the Broadway cinema is showing Vax
or we're trying to get it to show Vax.
There's two showings that are potentially possible
if people go online.
- And what's Vax about?
- Well, I'm gonna tell you that in a minute.
Well, actually I'm trying to hurry up here.
So Vax is about a story of vaccination in families.
There's a Facebook page.
- Vaccine damage.
- Yes, definitely.
- Very much supporting that positive correlation
between vaccines and damage.
And it's from a cover up to catastrophe.
It's an investigation and tell the CDC
has covered up some information.
There's a whistleblower.
It's supposed to be a very interesting film.
I'm hoping to see it when it comes to Broadway cinema
and Eureka if it does.
And you can visit the Facebook page.
It's called Bring Vax to Humboldt.
And you can go on to gather,
which is gathr.us/screening/16238.
16238.
Probably easier just to go to the Facebook page
and then you can get information from there.
So the two showings are August 10th at 7 p.m.
and August 15th at 7 p.m.
Try to sign up for the August 10th first
so that we can actually get the film here.
Otherwise, August 15th will be the second showing.
- Thank you for all the callers that called in.
We did have some more that we couldn't get on
and thanks so much for being there.
I just wanna let you know that next month
we won't be doing the show,
but we'll be back again in September.
And it's my intention to carry this topic on
through to next September
because we hardly had any chance to ask questions
that I wanted to get Dr. Peat to answer.
So thank you so much, Dr. Peat, for joining on the show.
Until the third Friday of September,
my name's Andrew Murray.
- My name's Sarah Johannison Murray
and we can be reached on 1-888-926-4372.
That's 1-888-WBM-ERB.
- Good night.